.TH HADI 1 "July 2026" "hadi" "hadi manual"
.SH NAME
hadi \- zero-downtime deploys for plain Linux services
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hadi
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hadi
deploys services that run as plain processes under systemd. Every deploy is
zero-downtime: the new version starts next to the old one on an idle port,
gets health-checked, and only then receives traffic through an on-box Caddy
proxy. If verification fails, the old version never stops serving.
.PP
Each service is described by a
.B deploy.json
in its repository. hadi runs on your machine or in CI and talks to boxes over
SSH; nothing is installed on the servers except the service itself.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
These apply to every command that touches a service.
.TP
.BI \-s " service"
Target a service by name from outside its repository. Boxes are resolved via
DNS and the service's configuration is read from the box itself. Inside a
repository, commands read
.B ./deploy.json
and \-s is unnecessary.
.TP
.BI \-\-zone " zone"
DNS zone for discovery. Precedence: this flag, then the
.B zone
of a deploy.json in the current directory, then the
.B HADI_ZONE
environment variable.
.TP
.BI \-\-host " address"
Restrict the command to a single box, bypassing discovery.
.TP
.BI \-\-ssh\-key " path"
SSH private key. Defaults to
.B HADI_SSH_KEY
(key contents or a path), then ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B deploy [\-\-skip\-build]
Run the full lifecycle: build the artifact (skipped with
.BR \-\-skip\-build ),
ship it with any configured files and units, start the new version on the
idle port, poll its health endpoint, flip the proxy, confirm through the
front door, and drain the old version without blocking. A failed
verification stops the new version and leaves the old one serving.
.TP
.B check
Validate deploy.json and print the plan: targets, ports, the generated
systemd unit. Touches nothing. Run it in CI on pull requests.
.TP
.B env edit
Pull the box's environment file into $EDITOR; saving ships it back and
applies it with a zero-downtime flip. Aborting changes nothing.
.TP
.BI "env set " KEY=VALUE ...
Patch one or more variables in place, then flip.
.TP
.BI "env unset " KEY ...
Remove variables, then flip.
.TP
.BI "env push " file
Replace the service's entire environment from a local file, then flip.
A full replace, never a merge.
.TP
.B env pull [file]
Fetch the box's environment to stdout or a file. Reads every box and warns
loudly if they differ.
.TP
.B releases
The deploy ledger per box: sha, timestamp, color, deployer. Depth matches
artifact retention (the last 5 releases stay on each box).
.TP
.B rollback [\-\-to \fIsha\fR]
Restore an earlier artifact (default: the previous one), verify it, flip.
Identical safety to a deploy.
.TP
.B status
Per box: live color, deployed sha, when, by whom, health, and the rollback
target.
.TP
.B ls
Every hadi-managed service at a glance, resolved from the
.B _hadi
TXT record and each box's own state. Needs a zone (see \-\-zone).
.TP
.B logs [\-f] [\-n \fIlines\fR] [\-\-unit \fIname\fR]
journalctl for the live color across all boxes, host-prefixed.
.B \-f
follows;
.B \-\-unit
targets an auxiliary unit (a timer, a helper) instead of the service.
.TP
.B ssh [box]
Interactive shell on a box. With one box, no argument needed.
.TP
.BI "exec " command
Run a command on every box as root, printing output per host.
.TP
.B ensure [\-\-config \fIpath\fR]
Converge hadi's own layer on the boxes: Caddy, its site config, directories.
Idempotent; runs implicitly on every deploy. Usable as a Packer provisioner
step to pre-bake boxes.
.TP
.B top [\-s \fIservice\fR]
Live dashboard: services, their boxes, box vitals, and streaming logs in one
screen. Enter drills in (fleet, service, box), esc goes back, / filters the
logs live, q quits.
.TP
.B update
Replace this binary with the latest GitHub release, verified against its
checksums. For workstations; CI pins a version on purpose.
.TP
.B version
Print the version.
.SH EXAMPLES
Deploy from a service repository:
.PP
.nf
    hadi deploy
.fi
.PP
Deploy to one box only, using an existing artifact:
.PP
.nf
    hadi deploy --host 10.0.0.5 --skip-build
.fi
.PP
Rotate a secret with zero downtime:
.PP
.nf
    hadi env set -s api STRIPE_KEY=sk_live_xxx
.fi
.PP
Snapshot an environment before risky work, restore it after:
.PP
.nf
    hadi env pull -s api > api.env
    hadi env push -s api api.env
.fi
.PP
Roll back to the previous release, or a specific one:
.PP
.nf
    hadi rollback -s api
    hadi rollback -s api --to 3f2c91a
.fi
.PP
Watch logs across all boxes; check the whole fleet:
.PP
.nf
    hadi logs -s api -f
    hadi ls --zone example.com
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HADI_SSH_KEY
SSH private key: PEM contents or a path to a key file.
.TP
.B HADI_ZONE
Fallback DNS zone when neither \-\-zone nor a local deploy.json provides one.
.TP
.B EDITOR
Used by
.BR "env edit" .
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ./deploy.json
The service's deployment configuration. See the config reference in the
repository's docs/config.md for every option.
.TP
.B /opt/<name>/hadi.json
On each box: the service's deploy state. The box describes itself.
.TP
.B /etc/<name>/env
On each box: the service's environment. The box is the source of truth;
edit it through
.BR "hadi env" .
.TP
.B /etc/caddy/hadi/<name>.caddy
On each box: the service's proxy site. Deploys rewrite its upstream port.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
The operation failed; the service is safe on the previous version.
.TP
.B 2
Configuration or usage error; nothing was touched.
.SH SEE ALSO
Full documentation in the repository:
.B docs/commands.md
(command reference),
.B docs/config.md
(deploy.json options),
.B docs/ci.md
(CI setup),
.B docs/how-it-works.md
(internals).
